welcome back to topcast and to my
discussion my ongoing discussion on
Popper's lecture on the sources of
knowledge and of ignorance it appears in
many places but probably the most
important place it does appear is in
conjectures and refutations I'm taking
my time going through this because hey
I'm enjoying it it's good writing it's
clear stuff it has examples of where
this material is useful both in a
historical context and today so I'll be
interjecting with my own thoughts on
what Papa has to say I just happened to
finish recording another top cast
episode about another thinker who comes
to ideas about rationality and there is
just a Poverty of coherence there at
times not something you get in popper
and so this is why it's so good for me
to come back to something like that
because my other critiques when it comes
to reading other people's ideas and
trying to understand stand where they're
coming from can leave me at times
deflated as if there is good stuff out
there why aren't people concentrating on
the good stuff yes sometimes they can be
completely ignorant of it perhaps they
read it as in certain cases I know they
have but then forget it or read into it
what they expect to be there without
realizing that there's something
actually quite counter to what they
think about the nature of knowledge for
example I suppose knowledge is a tricky
Beast to a certain extent we inherit so
much throughout our schooling education
and culture about what this thing
knowledge is we had to wait really until
Karl Popper to be given a coherent
picture that more fully explored whole
aspects of what was hitherto a kind of
mysterious thing this knowledge stuff
and how it is that we come to construct
our ideas about reality and whether or
not we can say that these constructions
accurately represent or model or explain
some part of reality I think we can and
I think popper says that we can as well
and so our knowledge contains truth
without being the truth but this is
sometimes hard to Grapple with the whole
notion of conjectural knowledge can be a
challenge for rather many people it was
certainly a challenge for the Ancients
in trying to understand what this stuff
is and how it is we come to understand
reality and popper has been speaking
about in this particular lecture the
classic philosophers and in particular
the philosophers in the empiricist
tradition and the philosophers in the
rationalist tradition I ended my last
episode on the notion that the truth is
Manifest Doctrine comes in these two
Styles the British empiricist view that
of bacon you just observe nature and
derive knowledge or observe the facts of
reality let's say and the Continental
European view that of Descartes that our
reason cannot generally lead us astray
in either case we can have the truth and
when we see it we can understand it as
the truth now there are virtues that do
flow from this and this leads to some
wonderful stuff a Liberation from
Authority but whatever the case the only
explanation under that view of why it is
that we make errors now and again where
our so-called fallibility comes from
because we aren't really fallible on
this view we just see the Manifest truth
the only explanation is we're being
deceived by some greater Powers a
conspiracy as a foot keeping us in the
dark through lies and deception other
people the authorities this is why Papa
was at pain to say that the liberal
tradition would have it following Milton
among others that in a battle between
truth and falsity truth will out truth
will win that battle and therefore
censorship is always wrong now popper
was kind of saying not quite censorship
is wrong but not because the truth will
always win the battle he will come back
to this but as we already know people
are fallible so knowledge production is
an imperfect journey of attempting to
identify errors and correct them and the
only way of doing this is to have it out
in the Public Square so to speak so
don't have censorship so the errors can
be corrected not so the truth can be
manifest in some way it might seem to be
splitting hairs but it's not as proper
emphasis this truth is Manifest Doctrine
is the root of all tyranny and he
explained popper explained how Plato and
others because they thought was truth
must manifest thought the government the
Kings and the rulers that they are quite
right at times to just lie to the
populace Noble lies were there because
the regular citizen was incapable of
ruling their blood the blood of the
average citizen did not contain the
right characteristics to enable them to
understand what it took to preserve the
greater good unlike the god-given gold
in the blood of the ruling classes they
could understand because they were born
to rule hence Lies by the ruling
politicians can be okay now we all must
admit we know of the politicians who do
this kind of thing it's almost a Trope
now the lying politician the government
Minister who insists well policy a will
only cost X dollars and they keep the
details from us knowing something about
how much it will in fact cost or what
the costings truly were without
massaging the figures or rather the tax
cuts are coming but after the next
election then they don't or in this day
and age saying this source of energy
really is cheaper than that one in the
long run when they either know the
opposite is true or they don't
themselves fully understand the details
and that's a kind of dishonesty too you
know know you could have this prosaic
honesty of saying I just do not
understand the details but I'm taking it
on the authority of the experts okay so
that's bad but at least it would be
honest and rather often one gets the
sense what some politicians should be
saying this and because that's really
what they're thinking you can tell they
don't understand some of the stuff
they're talking about a parochial timely
example that I probably shouldn't bring
up in a podcast like this but recently
in Australia one of our own ministers in
charge of energy policy was laughing
literally laughing at the idea that
anyone would suggest nuclear power as a
solution or part of the solution to our
current energy problems this is
ignorance of the highest order but I
digress ignorance is not quite lies it's
the lies that I'm concerned about and
was concerned about but all that said I
may have been too quick last episode
because there is indeed a virtuous
deployment of Lies by government in the
protection of the city and citizens we
need only consider wartime it was riot
in World War II the Allied governments
would at times say that the day of the
commencement of the battle of so-and-so
would be a Wednesday when they knew it
would begin two days earlier this kind
of misinformation given to their own
citizens deceiving their own people is
warranted or having a stated policy
let's say of never negotiating with
hostage takers or terrorists no matter
the circumstances that might be their
stated policy and what they say to the
cameras and to their own citizens and
yet behind the scenes they might very
well be negotiating with the hostage
takers and terrorists these lies protect
the city and citizens and are on a
Continuum with all those lies that
police and just regular people tell in
order to defend themselves in each other
lies in the service of self-defense
they're quite right lies can be
considered a kind of force the
withholding of information or deliberate
deployment of genuine misinformation
that often misuse term for a claim with
which I do not agree misinformation is
simply a lie and a lie is simply
something I think is false but will act
as if I think it's true anyways in order
to deceive it's about deception but
telling the Nazis there is no one else
in the house is not wrong though it's a
lie I could go on you get the point
these are cases where Plato's Lie by
leaders in the service of protecting the
citizens is quite right but those cases
are exceptions that prove the existence
of a general rule deception by
politicians is wrong precisely because
they are fallible and so is everyone
else and only by telling the truth all
the time or almost all the time can
there possibly be a chance for error
correction and progress not the
guarantee of such correction in progress
just the opportunity for it an
opportunity that does not exist under
regimes of heavy sent censorship by an
elite who think they know better that
they can always know better arises in
the philosophy of Plato because of a
truth is Manifest Doctrine and they kind
of racism this idea that you're born
into the ruling class or born into the
laboring class and thus the populist
need at times on Plato's view to be
deceived it all sounds terrible but let
us just recall that the empiricism of
bacon and the rationalism of Descartes
were forces that liberated civilization
from a worse fate of being entirely
under the thumb of other human
authorities as the disseminators and
validators of knowledge think for
yourself and understand the truth
yourself was the message of both the
British and Continental enlightenments
full slow parts of the epistemology
ultimately are so what does Papa say
next about all of that we're up to now
part six of on the sources of knowledge
and of ignorance and he goes on to say
quote this false epistemology however
has also led to disastrous consequences
the theory that truth is Manifest that
it is there for everyone to see if only
he wants to see it this theory is the
basis of almost every kind of fanaticism
for only the most depraved wickedness
can refuse to see the Manifest truth
only those who have every reason to fear
truth can deny it and conspire to
suppress it end quote this is clearly a
religious type impulse that a person is
bad because they should see the Manifest
truth of the holy book let's say or of
the teachings of the priest or Prophet
but even today modern incantations of
certain philosophers certain
philosophies have the same idea that
certain people are bad people they don't
just have the wrong ideas they're bad
people or perhaps they're mixed people
as I sometimes hear partly good partly
bad this is a category error as I've
said before there are good ideas and bad
ideas the bad ideas tend to suppress the
good ideas tend to suppress
problem-solving tend to suppress error
correction so on and so forth we all
have a mixture of ideas problems
floating around inside of our minds but
we are not identical to any of them we
have problem situations and we draw on
certain ideas many of them may be false
but they solve the problem for us but
just because we have a whole bunch of
bad ideas us person as a person are not
bad
actions can be bad our thoughts can be
bad but we are just that thing that has
certain ideas and generates certain
explanations but we are responsible for
our ideas however and responsible for
reflecting Upon Our ideas because we can
fall into fanaticism as well Justice
Publishers there one way to avoid that
is to recognize the truth does not
manifest to recognize errors everywhere
and you are error prone let's continue
Papa goes on to say quote
yet the theory that truth is Manifest
not only breeds Fanatics men possessed
by the conviction that all those who do
not see the Manifest truth must be
possessed by the devil but it may also
lead though perhaps less directly than
does a pessimistic epistemology to
authoritarianism this is so simply
because truth is not manifest as a rule
the allegedly manifest truth is
therefore in constant need not only of
interpretation and affirmation but also
of reinterpretation and reaffirmation an
authority is required to pronounce upon
and lay down almost from day to day what
is to be the Manifest truth and it may
learn to do so arbitrarily and cynically
and many disappointed epistemologists
will turn away from their own former
optimism and erect a resplendent
authoritarian theory on the basis of a
pessimistic epistemology it seems to me
that the greatest epistemologist of all
Plato exemplifies this tragic
development end quote and don't we
inherit some of this today
this idea that there are authorities
particularly in science and there is
such a thing as the science that certain
scientists pronounce upon and lay down
almost from day to day what is to be the
science and learn to do so arbitrarily
and cynically certain politicians
certainly relying upon particular
scientists who can be relied upon to say
the right things what is the science
some people saying We Are The Science
I've heard recently this is a sad State
of Affairs and it leads to this
pessimistic epistemology that certain
authorities in Academia and in the
intellectual circles certain people well
credentialed in science end up saying we
are the experts we understand the
evidence we have the evidence it's all
about a particular group of people a
priesthood if you like suggesting the
way to validate knowledge the way for
everyone else to validate knowledge is
to defer to their expertise not to check
whether or not the the claims being made
container or not but by virtue of some
highly credentialed Committee of people
who designate a particular thing as
being let's say the science and the
evidence and what is of course settled
pop goes on to say in part seven now
quote Plato plays a decisive part in the
prehistory of Descartes doctrine of the
veracetus day the doctrine that our
intellectual intuition does not deceive
us because God is truthful and will not
deceive us or in other words the
doctrine that our intellect is a source
of knowledge because God is a source of
knowledge this Doctrine has a long
history which can easily be tracked back
to at least Homer and hesiod end quote
now we look at a passage like that or
try to understand what's going on then
and many people many people will Grimace
or even laugh at something as juvenile
or something like that seemingly
juvenile How could a genius like
Descartes think anything like that well
of course he is not a juvenile he was
trying to figure out what this stuff
knowledge is he was trying to figure out
how we come to understand the world and
he was just under the misconception that
well it has to be absolutely true and
misconception people still carry around
today it's just that they don't think
that God is the one that God is the one
who is able to designate something is
certainly true they take the god out but
they keep the certainly true part so
there's a sense in which if you were to
listen to some scientists and
philosophers and thinkers today that
their idea of epistemology is even more
naive than this they've thought less
about this question than what they can't
have a card had a problem
how is it that my claims about reality
can track reality how do I know what I'm
saying isn't completely in all respects
false all he could come up with amongst
other things was to say well we begin
with the idea that I can't doubt my own
existence now how can I be sure of that
well the Divine exists how do I know
that well I've got a proof for the
existence of the absolutely perfect God
the absolutely perfect God being perfect
by definition is not going to deceive so
when you have this sensation of being
absolutely certain about something you
can be certain you're absolutely certain
and what you're thinking is certain is
absolutely true precisely because it is
guaranteed to be a such buyer certainly
existing God it's quite a rigorous idea
if you think false okay there are
problems with this but it's not as naive
as some of what you hear today where
they take out the God and they take
about the validation criteria and just
say well we're the experts who have the
evidence and we know for sure the
evidence is incontrovertible this
science has settled it's the same idea
settled science okay absolutely certain
true manifest truth or God is telling us
what is the absolute truth pick your
misconception pick your misconception
it's the same mistake fundamentally the
idea that there are certain cases in
which human beings are in fact not
fallible there are certain reasons why
that are deployed in in defense of this
idea but it's all wrong it's all an
error okay because error is everywhere
we can find some truth some of the time
but we can't say what it is what we have
are explanations which contain truth
useful information that solves our
problems but also contains
misconceptions and ultimately in the
final analysis should be expected to be
false let's continue Papa goes on to say
quote to us the habit of referring to
one's sources would seem natural in a
scholar or a historian and it is perhaps
a little surprising to find that this
habit stems from The Poets but it does
the Greek poets refer to the sources of
their knowledge the sources are Divine
they are the muses the Greek Bard's
Gilbert Murray observes in the rise of
the Greek epic Third Edition 1924 page
96 quote always owe not only what we
should call their inspiration but their
actual knowledge of facts to the musers
the musers are present and know all
things end quote hessiod always explains
that he is dependent on the muses for
his knowledge other sources of knowledge
are indeed recognized but most often he
consults the muses so does Homer for
such subjects as the catalog of the
Greek army as this quotation shows The
Poets were in the habit of claiming not
only Divine sources of inspiration but
also Divine sources of knowledge Divine
guarantors of the truth of their stories
end quote Okay so we've got God being
invoked by Descartes as the Divine
source of knowledge we've got the Greeks
and The Poets invoking Divine sources in
the form of users what are the Divine
sources today is it the proclamations of
certain Committees of scientists
individual scientists perhaps anyone
employed by a government who wears a
white coat are there institutes are
there referee journals that are
sometimes treated like holy books after
all if it appears in a referee Journal
then oh it must be genuine science and
not contain error it's published and
peer-reviewed checked by people's peers
after all the experts of our time the
Divine guarantors of the truth okay so
not quite perhaps they wouldn't call it
that not a Divine guarantor but you can
be highly confident is the way they
normally say it okay the we're at the
five Sigma confidence level that this
thing is true it's not Divine it's not
divinely guaranteed but it's almost
guaranteed by statistics is kind of
what's implied let's keep going quote
precisely the same two claims were
raised by the philosophers Heracles and
pomonides Heracles it seems sees himself
as a prophet who talks with raving mouth
possessed by the God by Zeus the source
of all wisdom and Parmenides one could
almost say forms the missing link
between Homer or hessiod on the one side
and Descartes on the other here's
guiding star and inspiration is the
goddess diki described by heraclitus as
the guardian of Truth parmanitis
describes her as the guardian Keeper of
the keys of Truth and as the source of
all his knowledge but pomonides and
Descartes have more in common than the
doctrine of divine veracity for example
parmanidis is told by his Divine
guarantor of truth that in order to
distinguish between truth and falsehood
he must rely upon the intellect alone to
the exclusion of the senses of sight
hearing and taste and even the principle
of his physical Theory which like
Descartes he founds upon his
intellectualist theory of knowledge is
the same as that adopted by Descartes it
is the impossibility of a void the
necessary fullness of the world end
quote this idea of the fullness of the
world is one of those quirky parts of
philosophy leibnitz goes on about a
similar kind of a thing Plato was
obsessed by it of course but what's
interesting for me here is how popper is
going directly to the problems here in
philosophy that they keep reoccurring in
different places how is it that we
validate our certain our knowledge it's
it's all a misdirection it just leads to
these enduring debates about the
impossibility of getting to certain
knowledge and the only explanations that
are martial in defense of this idea are
things that contain obvious error when
looked at carefully and especially if
you don't have a supernaturalist mindset
the problem then becomes if you've got
this solution namely well the
supernatural guarantees that your
knowledge is perfectly true you've got a
bit of a problem if you still endorse
the concept of certain perfect knowledge
but you don't endorse the concept of a
certainly perfect really existing God or
gods or something Divine you've got a
problem then this is the problem that
people have today who search for
certainty who want the Justified true
belief but they don't have anything to
guarantee that and they don't seem to
care it's just like well we'll push
forward anyway with insisting that our
ideas are justifiably true in some way
shape or form without worrying about the
basis ah that philosophy stuff that's
irrelevant we're just doing science here
which leads us to the truth the science
okay so it's not always like that for
all scientists but the way in which some
people some people who are in enamored
by the process of science without really
understanding the way they speak is kind
of in these terms Papa goes on in Plato
ion a sharp distinction is made between
divine inspiration the Divine frenzy of
the poet and the Divine sources or
origins of true knowledge this topic is
further developed in the radius Plato
even insists as Harold chernus pointed
out to me on the distinction between
questions of origin and of Truth Plato
grants the inspiration to The Poets but
denies to them any Divine Authority for
their alleged knowledge of the facts
nevertheless the doctrine of the Divine
source of our knowledge plays a decisive
part in Plato's famous theory of
amanesis in which some measure grants to
each man the possession of divine
sources of knowledge the knowledge it in
this theory is knowledge of the essence
or nature of a thing rather than of a
particular historical fact according to
Plato meno there is nothing which our
Immortal Soul does not know prior to our
birth for as all Natures are Kindred and
the kin our soul must be akin to Ale
Natures accordingly it knows them all it
knows all things on kinship and
knowledge the also Fredo Republic and
laws in being born we may forget but we
may recover our memory and our knowledge
though only partially only if we see the
truth again shall we recognize it all
knowledge is therefore recognition
recalling or remembering the essence or
true nature that we once knew this
Theory implies that our soul is in a
Divine State of omniscience as long as
it dwells and participates in a Divine
world of ideas or Essences or Natures
prior to being born the birth of man is
his Fall From Grace it is his fall from
a natural or Divine State of knowledge
and it is thus the r origin and cause of
his ignorance here may be the seed of
the idea that ignorance is sin end quote
okay so all of that idea is from Plato
Plato believed in the perfect forms and
that we had access in some way to the
perfect forms let no one who is ignorant
of geometry enter here remember that was
on Plato's Academy he thought that
mathematics was one of these ways in
which we can get to the Divine truth in
fact as long as you had this clear and
distinct idea which Descartes talked
about later you were getting to the
truth you were able to perceive the
truth would anyone think something as
silly as that today of course they would
what is the mathematician's
misconception the mathematician's
misconception the modern incantation of
this is the idea that mathematical
intuition gives you insight into the
true nature of reality of mathematical
reality what you are doing is you are
perceiving the truth directly you're
perceiving the truth directly you know
and people usually deploy if you're not
familiar with mathematics but you
understand that mathematics is the thing
you say well it's impossible it's simply
impossible for it to be otherwise then
one plus one equals two one plus one
equals two it's always the Trope example
cannot possibly be false I I perceive
that as absolutely true there's no way I
could ever be mistaken about that or a
labor under any misconception about that
I am perceiving the truth so they
inherit this they inherit this
misconception people who speak in this
way inherit this idea that there are
certain ways in which your soul your
brain your mind is able to grasp the
Divine the perfectly true and they
deploy the example of one plus one
equals two a mathematician certain kinds
of mathematician will apply this concept
to all of mathematics never mind just
the simple statements of arithmetic but
everything that they perceive that comes
to them via their so-called intuition
come to them via this Divine route of
inspiration of absolute inherent truth
not realizing that mathematical
knowledge is conjectured and it is the
conjecture is a computation being
performed by the brain which itself is
air are prone and you can be deceived
you can be deceived about this stuff
there is no Royal Road to truth there is
no perfect way of perceiving the truth
you are bound by what the laws of
physics say and the laws of physics
mandate that error cannot be completely
avoided and so you can never be sure
that you've avoided error that can
always be error no matter where or when
or what you're thinking or how many
people are thinking about the same thing
so this is the this is the modern
version of the divine origin or source
of our knowledge okay the the perfect
kind of knowledge let's continue Papa
goes on to say it is clear that there is
a close link between this theory of
amanesis and the doctrine of the Divine
original source of our knowledge at the
same time there is also a close link
between the theory of amanesis and the
doctrine of manifest truth if Even in
our depraved state of forgetfulness we
see the truth we cannot but recognize it
as the truth so as the result of
amanesis Truth is restored to the status
of that which is not forgotten and not
concealed it is that which is Manifest
Socrates demonstrates this in a
beautiful passage of the meno by helping
an uneducated young slave to recall the
proof of a special case of the theorem
of Pythagoras here indeed is an
optimistic epistemology and the root of
cartesianism it seems that in the meno
Plato was conscious of the highly
optimistic character of his theory for
he describes it as a Doctrine which
makes men eager to learn to search and
to discover yet disappointment must have
come to Plato foreign the Republic and
also in the freitius we find the
beginnings of a pessimistic epistemology
in the famous story of the prisoners in
the cave he shows that the world of our
experience is only a shadow a reflection
of the real world and he shows that even
if one of the prisoners should escape
from the cave and face the real world he
would have almost insuperable
difficulties in seeing and understanding
it to say nothing of these difficulties
in trying to make those understand who
stayed behind end quote so two things
there two things there to highlight one
is that Socrates is able to have a young
slave recall this is in scare quotes in
Papa's passage here recall the proof of
a of a special case of the theorem of
Pythagoras so there are many proofs of
the theorem of Pythagoras now does the
slave recall the proof or is the slave
able to recreate the proof by careful
questioning the Socratic method so to
speak okay this is a pet pedagogical
technique that many teachers use you
know the the right deployment of
questions to a learner to someone trying
to learn something can cause them to use
their background knowledge and their
background knowledge might consist of
what they already understand of logic
what they already understand of Reason
what they already understand of basic
mathematics in order to bring all of
these rules and bits of knowledge
together to generate something new like
a proof of Pythagoras Theorem this is
really what the slave was doing was
using these rules to conjecture new
conclusions and eventually reach the
conclusion that you know c squared
equals a squared plus b squared
something to that effect good
mathematics teachers can do this as well
of course okay just ask the student
questions and rather than just hey say
here's the proof you know ask the right
questions and the student will reason
their way to the answer and feel very
excited and happy about the fact that
they did it they did the thing they did
the reasoning they weren't just given
the answer this is what makes
mathematics so rewarding for some people
you no there's an answer someone has
already found the answer and you can do
it yourself on your own by getting them
so this is really what was going on with
the slave there of course but what
Socrates and what Plato is suggesting is
that in fact you always knew it there
was a sense in which your soul was
connected to the Divine world of
mathematics and was just remembering
what you already knew well not quite not
quite this this it's not completely and
utterly false right it's not completely
and utterly wrong it's just that you can
know it it's not that you already did
know it but there's an optimism in there
that anyone can know this is a
wonderfully optimistic idea that the
young slave can do what the Learned
Professor can what the Learned wise
philosopher came he can they can be
equal in this way of coming to learn the
same thing though they can both start
off infinitely ignorant they can at
least correct the same kind of errors
and come to a mutual understanding of
something this is wonderful this is
optimistic and then Plato goes into talk
about well Papa goes on to talk about
Plato's Cave and the idea that Plato
thought well even if the people trapped
in the cave got out of the cave they've
been trapped there living there their
entire lives they were born in the cave
they're looking at the Shadows dancing
on the cave wall they come to think that
reality consists of Shadows on the wall
that if they were taken out of the cave
at some point later on they wouldn't
understand what they saw they wouldn't
understand actual reality but of course
we know what is actual reality is that
actual reality that too is just an
interpretation of certain stuff but you
know Plato had a point okay the point
kind of there the the the truth lurking
in in this thought experiment is in the
same way that the prisoners looking at
the wall of the cave clearly you're not
seeing actual Birds they're just seeing
the shadows of birds not saying actual
trees they've seen the shadows of trees
that reality consists of something more
than what they're perceiving there well
that lesson also applies when you leave
the cave you're not directly perceiving
the birds and the trees either you're
interpreting light you're interpreting
light just as the people trapped in the
cave are it's just that you've got quite
a bit more of it now quite a bit more
light popper goes on still talking about
Plato's view of epistemology
paparazz quote the difficulties in the
way of an understanding of the real
world are almost superhuman and only the
very few if anybody at all can attain to
the Divine State of understanding the
real world the Divine State of true
knowledge of episteme this is a
pessimistic Theory with regard to almost
all men though not with regard to all
three teachers the truth may be attained
by a few the elect with regard to these
it is one might say more wildly
optimistic than even the doctrine that
truth is Manifest the authoritarian and
traditionalist consequences of this
pessimistic Theory are fully elaborated
in the laws just inside of course I'm
mentioning these things like the laws
there works by Plato he goes on thus we
find in Plato the first transition from
an optimistic to a pessimistic
epistemology each of them forms the
basis of one of the two diametrically
opposed philosophies of the state end of
society on the one hand an
anti-traditionalist anti-authoritarian
revolutionary and utopian rationalism of
the Cartesian client and on the other
hand an authoritarian traditionalism
this development May well be connected
with the fact that the idea of an
epistemological fall of Man can be
interpreted not only in the sense of the
optimistic doctrine of the amanesis but
also in a pessimistic sense in this
latter interpretation the fall of Man
condemns all Mortals or almost all to
ignorance I think one can discern in the
story of the cave and perhaps also in
the story of The Fall of the city when
the muses in their Divine teaching are
neglected see the Republic an echo of an
interesting older form of this idea I
have in mind parmenidi's doctrine that
the opinions of Mortals are delusions
and the result of a misguided Choice a
misguided convention this may stem from
xenophanese doctrine that all human
knowledge is guesswork and that his own
series are at best merely similar to the
truth the idea of an epistemological
fall of Man can perhaps be found as Carl
Reinhardt suggested in the words of the
Goddess that Mark the transition from
the way of Truth to the way of the Lucid
opinion and pop goes on with a quote
from Carl Reinhardt quote but you also
shall learn how it was that the elusive
opinion forcing its way through all
things was destined to pass for the real
now of this world thus arrange to seem
holy like truth I shall tell you then
you will be never more overruled by the
Notions of mortal's end quote thus
though the fall affects all men the
truth may be revealed to the elect by an
act of grace even the truth about the
unreal world of delusions and opinions
the conventional Notions and decisions
of Mortals The unreal world of
appearance that was destined to be
accepted and approved of as real the
Revelation received by Parmenides and
his conviction that a few May reach
certainty about both the unchanging
world of Eternal reality and the unreal
and changing world of versamillitude and
deception were two of the main
Inspirations of Plato's philosophy it
was a theme to which he was forever
returning oscillating between hope
Despair and resignation end quote so
again Millennia old this idea that a
select few have access to the truth and
that was of course inherited by
religious people over the following
centuries you know monotheistic
religions and so forth who thought that
particular people okay and certainly in
the Christian tradition anyway that the
pope for example was able to speak the
truth speak ex-cathedra from the throne
and designate certain things as simply
the truth okay if he said that Mary the
Mother of God zoomed up to heaven Body
and Soul which was called The Assumption
then it really truly happened because he
said it and he couldn't make an error so
it comes from this idea now why him well
he's you know he's the elect he's one of
these privileged people now is it the
case that today we still think the same
kind of thing will I leave it to the
listener as to whether or not it is
sometimes thought in society that
certain people have privileged access to
the truth and are less liable to fall
into error than others and by the way I
keep using this word amanesis and I
realize maybe that needs some definition
this is the theory that Plato had that
we are remembering past lives we're
remembering our divine soul and what it
knows it knows everything it's
omniscience when we learn stuff or
so-called learn stuff we're actually not
learning things for the first time we're
remembering things that our divine Soul
has because in this world of imperfect
reality we are just a shadow world of
the true reality the the world of forms
of perfect forms so amanesis is this
idea that we're that the process of
knowledge creation is a process of
actually remembering the Divine so let's
go on popular we're on to part eight now
and I'll finish with can't eat today he
says quote yet what interests us here is
Plato's optimistic epistemology the
theory of amanesis in the meno it
contains I believe not only the germs of
Descartes intellectualism but also the
germs of aristotles and especially of
Bacon's theories of induction for
minnows slave is helped by Socrates
judicious questions to remember or
recapture the Forgotten knowledge which
is soul possessed in its prenatal state
of omniscience it is I believe this
famous Socratic method called in the
theatitis The Art of Midwifery to which
Aristotle alluded when he said in his
metaphysics that Socrates was the
inventor of the method of induction
Aristotle and also bacon I wish to
suggest meant by induction not so much
the inferring of universal laws from
particular observed instances as a
method by which we are guided to the
point whence we can Intuit or perceive
the essence or true nature of a thing
but this as we have seen is precisely
the aim of Socrates mayotik its aim is
to help or lead us to amanesis and
amnesis is the power of seeing the true
nature essence of a thing the nature or
Essence with which we were acquainted
before birth before our Fall From Grace
thus the aims of the two meutic and
induction are the same incidentally
Aristotle thought that the result of an
induction the intuition of the essence
was to be expressed by a definition of
that Essence now let us look more
closely at the two procedures the
meyotic art of Socrates consists by the
way okay aside meiutic is the the the
the Socratic method it's just a fancy
word for the Socratic method so maybe
I'll take out my Utica we'll just say
the Socratic method the socratic eth the
Socratic method of Socrates consists
essentially in asking questions designed
to destroy prejudices false beliefs
which are often traditional fashionable
beliefs false answers given the spirit
of ignorant shortness Socrates
himself does not pretend no his attitude
is described by Aristotle in the words
Socrates raised questions but gave no
answers for he confessed that he did not
know thus Socrates method is not an art
that aims at teaching any belief but one
that aims at purging or cleansing the
soul of its false beliefs its seeming
knowledge its prejudices it achieves
this by teaching us to doubt our own
convictions fundamentally the same
procedure is part of Bacon's induction
end quote and that's a wonderful way to
end it
Socrates method is an idea of error
correction therefore it is this sense in
which no one knows as in has certain
knowledge in this particular case in the
socratic sense but rather we know that
there is something to know and by
removing the errors the false beliefs
the prejudices and so on and so forth
then we can get somewhat closer to the
truth we can have a better understanding
by dispelling the bad ideas sifting some
of what's true from a lot of what's
false okay it's not perfect it's not
going to lead to certain Divine
knowledge but it's going to get us
closer in some sense to this actual
reality to an understanding or modeling
of that actual reality this really this
paper here this lecturer that I should
say is the great philosopher teaching
philosophy of the greats you're having
the master himself Carl Poppa talking to
you about what the ancient
the Ancients that he looked up to
said about all of this stuff and how it
influenced the classic philosophers this
long tradition this series this
generation of people from Socrates and
Plato and Aristotle leading to the great
ideas of of bacon and Descartes and all
of them of course contain misconceptions
But ultimately are all brought together
in the epistemology of karpapa it really
is it's really this lecture really is a
master class and the fundamentals of
epistemology and the history of
epistemology and why we are where we are
now well till next bye-bye
foreign
[Music]